# Furry-Friends-Animal-Shelter
Repository for source code, documentation, executables, and dependencies for running the Furry Friends Animal Shelter program.
## Prompt:  
Furry Friends Animal Shelter asked me to develop an animal records system with an interface that allows supervisors and staff to enter data based on the animals at the shelter and view information-based reports.  
## Thought process:  
Simple; I tried to design the program with an interface that would be intuitive and easy to follow and use.  In doing so, I ran into complications with component positioning and window layouts.  
Effective; this was the most obvious goal, trying to design the program to get the job done with as few runtime errors as possible.  
Efficient; In designing this program, I subconsciously designed it to run as quickly as possible with little to no downtime between screens.
## To run the program:  
1) Make sure you have Java installed on your system  
2) Download either the .exe or the .jar file  
3) Download ALL the CSV files  
4) Place the executable file and the CSV files in the same directory  
5) Launch the application
## Function:  
When the program starts up, a main screen appears with an option to create an entry, search for an existing entry, or view reports for the shelter.  
If the user chooses to create a new entry, a general inventory form appears, allowing the user to enter general data about the animal such as its name, type, date of birth, date of arrival, if and when the animal was microchipped, the chip's ID and who owns the chip, and the animal's location in the shelter.  After this information is filled out and the user hits “Continue”, a dialog box will appear asking the user to confirm.  If the user confirms, this data becomes saved as an “Animal” object that carries over to the next screen which is a special inventory form depending on whether the animal was a dog, a cat, or neither.  These forms ask for more specific information about the animal.  The forms for dogs and cats ask about whether the animal was spayed/neutered, treated for fleas, and vaccinated against common infections.  For the spay/neuter field and the flea testing field, if the check boxes are checked then the accompanying date fields will be locked and uneditable, and any input will be cleared.  For the vaccination fields, if the check box is checked a date field will appear next to the vaccine that allows the user to select the date of the vaccination.  The form for the dog asks specifically if the dog was treated for heartworm, and the form for the cat askes specifically if the cat was declawed and treated for feline leukemia.  The form for animals that are neither dogs nor cats asks for a weight, a general type, a general description, and a list of vaccines it has had.  When all this information is filled out and the user hits “Save”, another dialog box will appear asking the user to confirm.  If the user confirms, the Animal object from the previous screen will be saved as raw data to the file “GENERAL_INVENTORY.csv” and as an object to the file’s hashmap.  That object and the data from this screen will create an object that is saved as raw data to a CSV file and as an object to the file’s hashmap.  Data for dogs creates a "Dog" object that is saved as raw data to the file "DOG_INVENTORY.csv" and as an object to its hashmap.  Data for dogs creates a "Cat" object that is saved as raw data to the file "CAT_INVENTORY.csv" and as an object to its hashmap.  Data for all other animals creates a "Other" object that is saved as raw data to the file "OTHER_INVENTORY.csv" and as an object to its hashmap.  When all data has been successfully saved, a dialog box appears, and the program returns to the main menu.  
If the user chooses to search for an existing entry, a screen with a text box, a "Continue" button, and a "Back" button appears.  At this screen, the user can enter a number in the text box and hit Search to try to find a matching entry.  If a match is found, a dialog box appears giving the user the option to edit the data for that entry.  Otherwise, the user can search again or return to the main menu.  If no entry is found, a dialog box appears informing the user.  
If the user chooses the “View Reports” option, a menu appears allowing the user choose a report to view.  The program can display an individual client report, an individual cost report, a shelter-wide inventory report, a shelter-wide expense report, and a shelter-wide gender report.  Each report appears in a separate window with a “Print” button and a “Done” button.  The “Print” button prints the contents of the JTable as they appear.  The “Done” button returns the user to the main menu.  All windows and JTable columns are resizable to the user’s discretion.  
